Hello, hello. Michael, welcome to Talk Python To Me. Great to have you here.
It's a great name.
I think this is the Michael Square, or there's a lot of things that we can do with this. This
is going to be really fun. I think Michael Square is the most, I don't think I've ever
had a Michael cubed on the show with three Michaels, but yeah, it's Michaels across the
board, or it could be Michaels all the way down, like turtles. Yeah, it's going to be
fun, whatever it is.
Yeah, no, thanks for having me.
Yeah, you know what?
I saw your article and I thought, oh, we got to talk.
So you wrote an article called Hyper Team Software.
And right before that, I wrote a blog post, an article called Hyper Personal Software.
And we were both, I could tell we were both thinking kind of in the same ways.
And your article riffed off of mine.
And so I thought, well, let me try to do a little bit of like technical jujitsu here.
you wrote an article off of mine and i'm going to have you on the show to talk about your article
and like i said michael's all the way down yeah no your article really resonated when i
had a look at the first time yeah well thanks so let's we're going to talk about
we've got a couple of names here so mine was hyper personal software because i wrote this for me
yours is hyper team software because the same concept applied to the enterprise honestly is
way more powerful than anything that i'm doing although i'll talk about some of the things i'm
doing people can decide that but the potential for what you can do to make companies better
and teams work better is tremendous and i honestly feel like it's it's an opportunity squandered for
a lot of folks so hopefully you can inspire them to you know crack the door open a little bit and
see what they can do. Before we get to that, yeah, well, I guess coding assistants have changed a lot.
Yep. They know like coding assistants are changing the world pretty quickly. Right. So in good ways and bad,
good ways and bad and over and over again. Right. For example, six months ago to today could be a
totally different experience of what's how things work or how well they work or what's possible and
so on so yeah it's just i don't it's a weird time michael it's a weird time it is a weird time
especially when you've been doing it for a while it's very weird exactly i mean i've been programmed
for over 25 years in tech and i feel like you must be in a similar time um journey there and
yep yeah i don't know weird just so many times i've seen technology come up that oh this is the
thing that's going to kill programming this is going to be the end of programmers uml drag and
drop visual basic low code no code etc and all those things are fine but they're absolutely not
the end of software i don't think coding agents are either but they're certainly the biggest
dent that they can put into software is anything that's come along before it.
Yeah, the speed and scale is sort of interesting, but sometimes you can just do a lot of bad
things much faster.
Yeah, I mean, that's a big debate, right?
Is it, are agentic coding tools, are these amplifiers or are they skilled little separate
things that do their own work?
I think there's a case to be made for amplification to a large degree.
Before we get into all that, let's just hear a little bit of background about you.
Like, tell us about yourself.
Sure.
I started off sort of academic life as doing a PhD in computational chemistry.
I've worked in quantitative finance for a long, long time.
And more recently, I started the data booth consultancy thing.
So just the brand for me, working as a single consultant.
And I've been doing that sort of coming out of COVID,
I decided to do something different.
So yeah, about the last five years I've been doing that.
Very cool.
Computational chemistry, huh?
Are you familiar with a program called HyperChem?
I think I am, actually.
That's pretty old.
We're talking 90s.
I mean, I think we're talking 90s.
Yeah, yes, definitely 90s.
So I finished my PhD in late 90s.
I vaguely remember the tool.
but I vaguely remember chemistry now as well.
I studied a lot of chemistry, and I loved organic chemistry,
and I found this program called HyperChem,
and it was just so incredible.
It was like the Google Earth equivalent of complex chemistry,
and wow, was it a neat thing to play with.
And I figure maybe it's right around a similar time frame.
Yeah, I certainly, yeah, I do remember now that you mentioned it.
Organic chemistry was my most unfavorite element of chemistry.
That's why I did theoretical, because experiments are much easier to control on a computer than real life.
And organic chemistry, it smells bad.
It does.
Honestly, I would tell you, probably is the reason that I didn't work in chemistry.
I'd get headaches all the time from the super volatile chemicals and stuff.
I'm like, if I did this every day, I don't know what this would do to me, but it wouldn't be good.
So let's go do math.
Math doesn't work.
Yeah, I start with math.
Yeah, cool.
So I've done computing in a chemistry school.
Nice.
So give us a bit of information about DataBooth.
And you've got some nice articles there.
You've got some consulting.
Yeah, just tell us about Data Booth before we move on.
Yeah, sure.
So as I said, for a long time, so I thought and I'd also
before this in reviewing a lot of models and things that
are used in finance, so I thought it'd be nice to actually build some things again.
I sort of identified data science as a place to hang out.
I did a boot camp in Oakland, actually, in 2017,
and just decided this was sort of a growth area.
I think that conclusion was correct, as it turns out.
But-
first time I've done something on my own.
And I've had a chance to do some interesting things.
So I worked with a lady who does experiments
with horses, for example,
and she trying to understand when a horse is stressed,
for example.
So she had a Raspberry Pi based experiment.
I wrote code to control the experiment
and then I wrote the code to analyze the results.
So I guess being small,
you can make choices to do small projects
And for me, that was helping out somebody doing fundamental research.
And I guess it got me back to my roots a bit.
So I've been able to do something like that.
And then I've been able to do stuff in finance.
Again, I worked for a small media company at one point as well, helping them do some analysis.
So it's been fun, but it's also, as I say, it can be hard to be seen when you're small.
I'm fortunate I have a wife who is happy to give me some flexibility.
Yeah, shout out to her as being a great support.
Yeah.
I think the connection is a little bit up and down.
I think it's a little bit up and down.
Maybe just for a while, let's maybe cut our video off and just see if we'll do a little better.
okay so
all right you're now represented by the amazing gray chess piece of everything
but hopefully this is better yeah oh no worries at all so yeah you know i think it's super
important to have a spouse who is understanding of those kinds of things because it lets you do
really, really interesting things. Like I can say the same thing for my family as well
in a slightly different way. what a cool story about the horse, you know, it's mixing biology
and IOT and tech and yeah, that's, that's the kind of stuff that you've learned a whole bunch
in a real short period of time, but also you can make a big difference, you know?
Yeah, I learned a heap. I'd never worked with a Raspberry Pi, for example. So it's quite interesting when you don't play in a space, you don't realize just how far certain things have advanced. So it's pretty cool what you can do on very small devices these days.
Yeah, absolutely. Okay. Well, that's, that's data booth. Very cool. People can check that out. Let's take it, take it out a bit and talk about sort of internal company software. There's a lot of people listen to the show who are not what you would call enterprise developers, right?
Yeah. They they are students. They're maybe data scientists kind of on their own or they work at a research or they work at a startup.
So give us a sense of what internal software like these bigger companies looks like today and like maybe, you know, before the AI world and so on.
Sure. So I think every company is different and I'm sure you've experienced that as well.
Lots of different operating models.
But I guess enterprises always need to make sure that things are orderly to some degree.
So when I work on my MacBook as a solo practitioner, I can make decisions about what software I want to use,
how I want to use it.
Ideally, when I'm working with data,
you've got to make sure that you've got certain controls in place.
But within companies, those things really matter, right?
So you do need to make sure that things are secured appropriately,
that people only have access to the things that you want them to.
So I think in that context,
there's always going to be sort of overheads and friction
on developing any sort of software.
So you've just got to be aware that you need to allow for those things.
So I think the idea that we'll talk about coming up is the sense that when you're actually
working within a team, within an enterprise, maybe there's certain things that you can do
that don't need to impact too many other people, and therefore you can achieve a greater degree
of autonomy but they're certainly the things that you need to be thinking about within the enterprise
so it's not it's not a choose your own adventure it's a work within the constraints which are
appropriately there and particularly between industries you can have some industries which
have little regulation and then in other industries they're highly regulated for very good reasons
But again, that can provide an additional layer of complexity as you start to think about how
you develop and what you develop. For sure. And I've not spent a ton of time working at large
companies. I worked at a company for maybe six months that had 1,200 people. And I got there by
being acquired from a company that had 10 full-time employees. So it was a little bit of a shift.
But I did do professional software training for a long time.
So I taught week-long courses at over 100 different companies.
And, you know, you just get a look inside these places.
You're like, wow, this one is really different.
This is, like, really unique in this way or that.
But one of the – I mean, maybe not with the tech companies, but maybe even so.
But like for many of the companies, I would say there's two golden rules of a lot of this kind of stuff.
One of them is don't change it.
It's working.
Just don't change it.
You know what I mean?
Yeah.
No, absolutely.
Yep.
And there's something to that, right?
If it is working, why would you fix it?
It can be very expensive to change things, right?
Yeah.
So maybe we'll call that the principle of least touching.
Like just don't touch it.
it's just leave it it's over there just don't touch it and that leads to like you're talking
about on your macbook like oh i could use like python 314 and we could pick oh let's try fast
api and they're like that's cute we use python too you're like huh really okay you don't want
to change it no principle at least touch it we don't touch this it works um and then i think
No, absolutely.
Sorry.
When I was in a previous company, they were using 3.7, for example.
I'm like, yeah, but it's out of support.
It's end of life.
Aren't you going to upgrade things?
And people just stared at me.
It was like, why would we?
So, yeah, I guess it's what you should do on paper versus what you do in reality.
Yeah.
And both of those ways are right.
I think like you maybe don't want to go mess it up because it is working.
But at the same time, we had things like log4j and other stuff where like they're really big problems.
And it's because people didn't want to update their software.
So the other core principle, I think, is you break it, you bought it.
And that's like if you do touch it and it was working and now it's not working, this is now your problem.
And maybe the person who knows how it works doesn't even work here anymore.
The person that did it almost certainly does not work there anymore, right?
If you look at the stats, I think sort of typical tenure, at least these days, is less than two years.
So the likelihood that you're going to find anybody in a team that knows anything can be just very, very small, right?
It can be very small.
And so that leads to some interesting gaps or in a more glass half full way, like opportunities.
There's so much of these little tools and these little connectors and these things or just software that was never built because you don't want to take it on if you build it.
And they're just sitting there inside these huge companies that have so much internal software.
but they just, they're either really outdated
or they're just really ugly and they work clunky,
but people just, like the person who built it left
and no one else can even build it.
So like, be thankful it works,
not that it's hard to use, you know?
So there's just so much opportunity
for this concept of hyper team software, I think.
Yeah, no, I think there's lots of opportunities out there,
but I think like any problem,
you want to think through a solution maybe before you start changing anything.
I think it's very tempting just to jump in.
And I think, yeah, taking a few steps back.
And again, just understanding the scope of the problem that you're trying to solve.
So like most of life, if you choose a smaller problem to start with,
maybe you learn something from it and it helps you start to tackle bigger problems.
Yeah, 100%.
I think it's also just, you know, as a,
an aside for people who are looking to advance their career,
if you can improve these tools and make life better for everybody at the
company, that's a really high visibility thing to do. Right.
It used to be all the data scientists had this super annoying thing that they
had to do. And then you spent two weeks on it.
And all of a sudden everybody's happier at work and they know that it was
because of you. Like that shines a pretty good,
halo on you
yeah like I'm probably not a too much of a limelight guy but no like there's
great opportunities to like make a real impact I think and for me coming out of
a sort of science background and I try and see everything as an experiment in
life and I try and put all of my experiments orderly in GitHub for
example. Yeah, I think you can move quickly and you can experiment and you can identify the paths
not to go down so that you can actually work out the paths that are worth pursuing. And to your
point, yeah, there are opportunities to be seen. And you can move from that. I just wanted to draw
a diagram on a piece of paper and convince you that this was a good idea to, well, here's the
the working prototype or proof of concept and we actually now can talk about have a real discussion
rather than a hypothetical one that's so interesting that you bring that up because
one of the things that i found really challenging working at bigger companies even not huge companies
so just in general is you can describe something and people go oh maybe that's nice you can tell
tell them you can do it and they're like, yeah, probably you can.
But then you just take a little bit of time
and you show them like, no, look, it's not, I could do this.
It took me two hours to do this.
If we keep going on it, it'd be really nice.
Look, wait, you already kind of did this?
Like, this is actually really amazing.
I really think that makes a huge difference
in how much trust and for adoption you get for like your ideas.
Absolutely.
like in a previous employer,
you sort of had the business analysts go,
okay, let's draw up wireframes and whatnot.
And then we can prove out this and do that.
Like, no, we're not using wireframes.
We're just building it because it doesn't take very long.
And then people can see it, see the real thing.
And that's not a critique of the sort of BAs at all.
It's just the world's changed, I think,
from when you used to work like that.
Yeah, that's very true.
And there's also, this like I think leads into where we're going.
There's, we're going to build software in a manner that a bank could run on it
because that's our company philosophy and our culture way of working.
we build solid software that's no frills that works versus yeah but do you need to do that for
the log parsing thing that's just going to help us see if the server's up like no you probably don't
but don't you know what i mean like it's it's i think it's hard for some of these groups to kind
of break away from treating everything as like mission critical and i think that's pretty germane
to this conversation you know uh yeah like i think you need to work out uh what mission critical
actually means right and whether certain things particularly within teams actually are mission
critical because that will sort of help guide maybe how you develop things and who should
be developing them but I think maybe just picking up on the logging comment there if I understood it
correctly the argument used to be that putting in sort of baseline good practices was expensive
and i think that's also changed so um the effort to put logging into a piece of software is like
almost trivial these days right so i think there's a whole bunch of things where people go oh we
couldn't possibly do that or maybe that isn't warranted but if it doesn't really cost you
anything um in my world why wouldn't you put it in um like if it's a point pointless piece
of functionality then fair enough right we don't want we don't want um animated gifs in everything
But, yeah, there's just basics of good software engineering that I think you should put into sort of any tool that you're developing.
Yeah, that's a good point.
You know, it used to be you'd build software and you might have some kind of team lead review it for security or run Bandit against it or something like that and hope that it's kind of okay.
I mean, you don't call this function wrong.
like print s printf or something or you know yeah the unsafe version of yaml load whatever right
those are the kind of things you should get checked but now i mean we basically have mythos
as a co a co-worker you know if you subscribe to Claude Code or the new
chat gpt stuff or codex yeah and you can just say look do a security review on this
And what used to take like two weeks and a $20,000 pen testing engagement is now like an hour or less.
Yeah, no, it's pretty crazy.
I think you, of course, still need qualified experts to review the results, right?
So you don't want to outsource your thinking, I would say, to a machine that's very good at multiplying and adding matrices together very quickly.
So the machines bring a lot to the table, right?
But I think, yeah, even if you're doing those sort of reviews,
you want to leverage the machine's capability,
not just completely rely on it.
And I think that's one of the things
that we talked about good and bad at the start.
I think that's one of the things where I get slightly concerned
where people seem to be outsourcing their thinking.
That's not across the board.
Yeah, 100%.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Like, yeah, it is interesting.
I noticed the University of Washington
teaches a course now on critical thinking,
which is somewhat interesting, right?
Why would you need to teach people critical thought?
Like clearly, you get taught critical thought
through a whole bunch of experiences and courses in life,
but I think it speaks somewhat to the age
that you'd actually have an official course on that.
That is really interesting.
And I guess that's what experience brings, right?
Right, right.
The more you can sort of shortcut your way through literature
and philosophy and math and so on,
then you kind of, I guess, need to make it up somewhere else.
No, absolutely.
But I think experience plays into this a lot, right?
So the longer you've been around, just the more things that you've seen that have gone wrong.
And that's not unexpected in life, I don't think, because we all like to take shortcuts.
But I think, as I often say to people, just choose the right shortcuts.
Yeah, it's like, nope, this one, I had to come in the middle of the night because the server went down.
We don't want to do this anymore.
Or the car broke down on the side of the road because of this.
We're not doing that anymore.
you know you learn the lessons over time i suppose uh hopefully you learn the lessons over time
that's the goal i think as i say everything's an experiment
the question is will you learn from the experiment maybe maybe you'll learn not 100 there's no
guarantees i do want to put one more before we jump into the details of your article yeah i do
want to put one more concept out there for people that i think can sometimes get lost in the fray
as well and that's the concept of competing against non-consumption so for put it in context
for my example of like oh we have a pen tester now that can work on this thing you would hire a pen
tester for the most important part of your software but your little tiny like expense
tracking tool that jane from 2021 wrote and left the company you're probably not going to hire a
pen tester for that. But now these days with these tools, you can quote hire a pen tester for it.
And it takes half an hour. And it's not that, ah, you probably should have hired, you probably should
really use like a real person. Like there was never going to be a pen test of that at all.
And now there can, like there will be for the real software maybe, but not for like these little
internal tool things that like, I think we're going to talk about. So I think this concept of
competing against non-consumption is worth keeping in mind.
I know I think it's a good point I guess the question still is would you is there a case to
actually use the machine for that and if it's sort of free then I guess why not but there's still lots
of other things that you might investigate right so do you actually want to spend some of your token
budget on that even. So I think again, it's thinking well about problems and going, what are
the actual pros and cons here, or what are the risks that we're trying to mitigate?
100%. Okay, let's jump into hyper team software. And we're going to talk through your excellent
essay, From Hyperpersonal Software to Hyperteam Software, Small Team Built AI Assisted Tools
inside the enterprise because i like i said i think there's just a gold mine of opportunity
here to solve some of these principle of least touching and you break it as yours sort of type
like things are a hassle for everyone and just no one's going to go near it um and no one understands
it i think there's a huge possibility there so but since you said you know this is this is based on
my concept of hyper personal let me just give people a really quick uh definite like a starting
point from there. So I said, like, look, I think there's a lot of people that say,
if this AI stuff is so good, why don't we see an explosion of software? And my article said,
I think there is an explosion of the software, but so much of it is like dark matter in a sense.
Like you can't see it because it's not worth bringing out into a great big flash. It's just
a bunch of these little things that solve or polish a bunch of stuff. So for my example was,
I was using the start page search engine and they started putting ads that would fill like two pages before you even got to the first search result.
Like, I don't mind having an ad.
I want to support you, but two pages.
This is ridiculous, right?
Yeah.
So I said, I just had Claude build me an extension that would just remove the ads just for me.
I have no intention of ever shipping it.
I just thought, here's a problem I have.
I bet in 20 minutes I can make it go away.
you know yeah so that sets the stage tell us about this concept here like tell us tell us about
your idea uh yeah sure uh so apologies for the name um first of all uh because i don't think
uh it's uh particularly the right name but i just wanted to riff off uh your name so that was the
initial thinking behind it and also apology for the length of my articles I
try not to write so much but sometimes that's just what happens the so yeah I
guess as I reflected on your article and thought well if Michael can build stuff
that solves his problem surely people in smaller teams within companies actually
have plenty of problems to solve and you don't want to be necessarily starting up a capital
P project and having lots and lots of people involved which is sort of a typical model
because of the way companies are structured but if you can just solve a small problem
and it doesn't involve any sort of other people outside your team or any great infrastructure
structure. So you're not trying to set up a client server database, necessarily to solve
it. You're not trying to include sort of authentication, because the security of it doesn't really,
really matter. In this case, you're just solving a small problem within your team, then why
not take a similar approach?
Yeah, like I've already beat to death, I think there's tons of opportunity here. But, you
give me your sense of this at my limited experience i would say for everything that you look at a
company and you see oh here is their product here's their software or at least the software
that powers their product like if they were a car company maybe it's like their website ordering i
don't know there's 10 times as many hidden little small somewhat unpolished things that would fall
into this category that are critical to making everything work.
Yeah.
Yeah, so I think, like, as we've discussed offline,
like, there's nothing new here.
People have always been building little widgets to solve problems.
I guess the game changer here is that you can do this incredibly quickly.
So you can build a lot of good things quickly,
or you can potentially build a lot of bad things quickly.
So having some sort of vision around how to do it with some degree of discipline, I think, matters.
But, yeah, there's always been those solutions out there.
And I think, again, with this theme of make everything an experiment,
if you can do experiments quickly, then you can work out, well, does this actually fly?
Is it actually solving a real problem?
And, well, maybe in the past I could do it at the 90% level,
But nowadays I can build the 99% and still do it 10 times faster than the 90% solution.
Yeah, it really takes away some of the limitations.
You know, you're like, yeah, everyone hates this.
It's a hassle or it could be smoother, could automate more.
But it's going to take four weeks and it just doesn't justify someone working on it for four weeks.
But if it's going to take four hours, you know what?
It might be worth four hours, right?
there's that unproductive afternoon anyway that you had the big meeting in the morning you can't
focus it's just you could build it then you know uh yes and the implication here is that you have
requisite skills uh to build it so um of course everybody can build software these days and i
think that's a great piece of democratization that has occurred i would argue that not everybody can
build good software or sufficient software and that's not a critique of anything other than i
experience matters and some degree of training matters still so that you can actually shape
things that will actually work together or have thought through some of the problems that are
coming next so it's not just about building a solution that works for today although in some
cases that may be warranted but it's also thinking about well how might this fit in a broader ecosystem
yeah i think i think we should put the whole sort of vibe coding stuff as like all right not that
yeah right like yeah i could use ai to try to do computational chemistry but i'm highly
unqualified to do so like highly unqualified even though i studied it long ago so it's not a knock
on me that i'm dumb it's just i don't know chemistry that well right i don't i don't already do that
so i think it's fair to say like look you have these companies full of people who are already
programmers and they have i think a really important part is a domain name to domain knowledge
to like understand and solve these problems like not just from like writing code but
this is actually what we want to accomplish here not just this is how the code works make the code
better um yeah i don't think um yeah it's always just about making the code better but um i think
and this I hope comes out in the article,
is that if you actually have skills
and you're embedded more so within a business,
then you can understand the business problems
by definition much better.
And I think combining that domain knowledge
with if you're bringing the software engineering skills,
I think that then becomes a really potent force.
I'm not saying that like within sort of more technology focus
uh parts of businesses that you don't have people who can now build things much faster and probably
better and indeed do their pen testing and other things but i think my focus here is really just
if i'm if i have the requisite skill um if i can do my computational chemistry in my small team as
it were what can i how can i then sort of leverage those skills to really build uh software that
matters for my team and solves those sort of problems which probably never would have got off
the ground before or if they did as i say they're only getting sort of maybe 90 of the way there
and not really um nailing the problem yeah absolutely so let's talk through some of the
the main points of your article so top one here is what this looks like in practice and you give
a bunch of good examples so maybe you could talk through each one of these so the first one is
onboarding accelerators tell us about that yeah so i think in most teams uh uh onboarding can be
a little bit painful so how much of your budget as it were do you want to spend on fixing that problem
so some of it can just be fixed by uh you have a buddy system and people talk to each other
the better right but in other ways it may be technical setup and if you can actually develop
a script which runs for more than one person on one day so you can build in that robustness where
a script might have used to fail you can now sort of yeah just accelerate that onboarding and
everybody then is on hopefully a very similar footing which helps as well so you don't have the
it works on my machine only problem this is great and it's it's such low-hanging fruit and i'm sure
people can tell that i'm excited about this idea but just as you describe that like i'm like okay
and we can do this and this and this so for example i imagine a typical onboarding is here is a wiki
go read the setting up your machine select mac or Linux or windows or whatever you're doing
I think go down the script, right?
You're like, okay, well, do that, and then we'll see you at lunch.
That's one way.
But with some of these AI tools, you could build, like, cool little scripts that will go along and do a lot of it,
but also do things like check and make sure that you have the right service pack,
because we're not going to allow you to run this old version of Windows
and then install this connection to our database, potentially, even if it is Q&A or whatever.
And beyond just the setting up, maybe something about the way things are set up changes.
So you could write a little program that says, here's the things we want set up.
We change, you know, when it changes, I want you to go look at the machine again and tell me if it's still good or if we need to evolve it right.
Like that's really hard to do.
Say like you set it up two years ago.
Is it still good?
Yeah, no.
And I think the other thing is you can actually document it.
Right.
So you can easily point the machine at the script that you've just written and make sure that the documentation is in sync.
because some users are not going to be able to read shell,
for example, if it's that sort of thing.
But if you have documentation which is tightly synced with it,
then you've, I think, hopefully got the best of both worlds.
JOHN MUELLER: For sure.
OK, the next one I'm also super excited about,
internal tool user experience polish.
JOHN MUELLER: Yeah, absolutely.
So for somebody like me, I tend to write Python and SQL, right?
I'll spin up Streamlit if I want a UI for something as an example.
But I typically think that CSS and similar are sort of dark arts, right?
However, this sort of opens up possibilities with dashboards and whatnot
where they were sort of okay, but actually with a little bit of polish,
they'll become much more usable.
And for somebody like me, yeah, I don't want to have that specific set of skills,
but with a little bit of work with the machine,
I can probably get it, not to the point of a graphic designer's sort of capability,
but maybe a bit better than it was.
And people respond to interfaces, right?
If you have a interface which is perfectly functional but looks rubbish, people don't trust it.
Back in the day when it was more desktop apps, a lot of Visual Basic type of stuff,
people would describe these kind of tools as battleship gray.
Like technically they have a color.
They just don't care about how they look.
They're just gray backgrounds with black and white bits, you know,
like maybe a green button if you go crazy.
You know what I mean?
And it was just uninspiring.
No, absolutely.
I, throughout my career, have done a lot in Excel, right?
And one can argue the merits of that.
And I think there's lots of reasons not to like Excel.
However, lots of people use it.
So I think if you're working with end users who do have to use it,
then even in excel you can make a UI which looks not too bad or you can have one which is just
completely horrible so i think it doesn't matter what you're developing the tool in if you can
polish the interface you can get some much better usability yeah absolutely and it's simple things
like you've got to enter all the stuff in an order but if you enter it in the wrong order it's really
hard to change it but hey claude could you make this drag and drop reorderable sure but that that
now it's right yeah we ordered like oh that's we have to use to delete it and start over if we
entered it in the wrong order now we just reorder it that's incredible right and that kind of stuff
is just so good yeah or um claude you're a you're a expert uh ux designer um and you need to allow
for appropriate accessibility features.
Can you draw on your best practice knowledge
to create a beautiful UX potentially?
I haven't done that experiment,
but I suspect it probably works.
It would work fantastically.
You could say like, look, I think we wrote this website
and I don't necessarily think it's accessible to blind people.
So could you go through and just look and see what's not great
and just fix that for me?
or if you need help, ask me, but probably you can fix 95% of it.
I think that kind of stuff would be great.
Yeah, again, I don't think this is a call out to get rid of all UX designers.
I think it's to say to the existing UX designers,
how do you work with the machine?
And rather than you only had time to polish one dashboard or whatever it was,
now you can polish a whole heap of them
and get consistency where it's appropriate and things like that.
So, yeah, people are nervous, right, around the AI is going to take my job stuff, right?
And I feel that and I see that as I sort of go around places.
But I think that's the wrong mindset and I'm trying to get the view out there that you can work with the tools to get really good results.
But you can't not do that.
You can't say I want to live five years ago because that world's gone.
for better and worse yes i totally agree i i think again this is a case of like but potentially
competing against non um what i forgot the term i was using uh non-consumption so yeah it could
be this is a tool that was just never was going to get somebody who knew about accessibility to
review it and now since it's basically free to ask you might as well ask like could you just make
that a little bit better because we do have some folks in our company who would really benefit from
that right yeah because the people who work on the accessibility they're working on the real
website the real tools you know what i mean yeah no absolutely absolutely and uh again it opens up
opportunities for inclusion right so um yeah i think that's very exciting yeah absolutely there's
so many cool things like that all right decision pack generators uh yeah so uh typically you've
always got packs going to decision makers and governance forums and cut and paste and all those
sort of awful things can both introduce errors and just be time consuming. So I think the ability to
pull those sort of materials together in an automated way, which you probably would never
have done because the cost of that was just far too high compared to the effort and result you're
after so i think again whether it's a script which is automating some sort of powerpoint thing again
avoid powerpoint at all costs if you can but um uh yeah anything to pull together packs which make
it accessible to people that have relevant linkages to other documents and stuff there's just a lot of
opportunities there. I think that's a huge opportunity actually. Yeah, agreed. Hyperteam
databases. So before you jump into this, I think one of the big areas that is not solved with AI
very well, maybe almost at all, is operational stuff like DevOps. I need to make sure that this
server is up and running and that we have backups for this and that they run and we can, you know,
Like just this managing multiple machines is not,
it's just not really where the AI works that well.
I know you can make it do these things,
but generally it's on local files and chats and stuff, right?
So this concept of hyper team databases ties into like basically avoiding that, right?
Well, yes and no, I'd say.
So I'm not a DevOps intra expert at all.
I have very limited expertise.
in fact, so that's something I wouldn't talk to.
But in terms of, I guess, the thrust of this is really,
so databases sort of used to be hard, maybe, or harder,
but I guess, yeah, one of the things I do is use tools
like DuckDB or SQLite.
So I don't have to have the whole client server database thing set up.
So if I just want to capture data within my team,
and it's just my team sharing it, then there's a lot of options here, I think.
And although DuckDB, that being said, has just released
an extension called Quack, which opens up a sort of client server model.
But yeah, so I think that's really the idea here.
How do you allow for
just a really lightweight place where you can capture data
as part of your application or something like that?
or you can shove your logs in there or whatever it is because i think as soon as you sort of side
point but related is as soon as you have observability data uh you can start to ask
questions about well how are people actually using this software and uh can we learn from that right
like time series type stuff and so on yeah oh yeah yep or user flow they went here then here and then
they did this yeah yeah i think traditionally it just would have been like expensive to do that and
And nowadays, I try not to use the trivial word too much
because it understates the amazing capability
of these packages to actually deliver functionality.
It does.
I think some interesting ways
that this recommendation is really powerful
is so many of these internal tools that people have,
even in a company of 1,000 people,
there might be six people that need to use this little internal web app they're all the ones who
approve expenses and it's about like scanning approving expenses do you need like replica
you know failover postgres for that probably not like i mean maybe but if it's really a small thing
it could just be like a sqlite file and then the deployment management of it and backup of it
become so simple and I think there's a lot to do with this.
No, absolutely.
I think through the, what, it's 2026 now.
I think sort of, yeah, through late 2018, 2019, for three or four years there, this whole push was to sell a whole bunch of data infrastructure.
And I think people spend way more than they needed to.
And I think you'll see that in the DuckDV sort of materials
and mother duck and things like that,
where they've just called out the fact
that most people don't have big data.
And so I feel you're probably overpaying for infrastructure.
Again, depends on your industry, right?
Some industries have mandated requirements
for how they handle their data.
But I think, again, depending on the nature of your business
and your team if you've just got a backup of the database that might be good enough yeah well it's
not just paying for the infrastructure you know like we now have like a huge spark cluster
that does whatever yeah it's also you now need somebody who understands what a spark cluster is
how to run it what happens if it goes down someone's getting called whereas sqlite is just
It's a file.
If the app is running, the SQLite quote database
is also running in process, you're good to go.
Yeah.
That really like fits a lot of these apps well.
Yeah, but I think the marketing arms
of some of these big data in for places just,
it's, I don't know whether it's they're selling FOMO or what,
but I think you see a lot of suboptimal decisions
in that space.
I 100% agree with you.
I think what they're selling is the ability to dream big.
Like when we get a petabyte of data,
we're going to need to be able to ask questions about it.
Like, yes, maybe, but you just launched the site
and you don't really have any users yet.
So later when you get there, that'd be a great idea.
But like, don't kill yourself with that kind of stuff early.
Right.
So anyway, that's, I think that's neat.
All right, template app patterns.
This one is, I didn't expect this one.
Tell us about this.
Yeah, so this was just as I played with some things.
It occurred to me that maybe it would work okay,
so it doesn't have to be Toml, YAML,
whatever your favorite language is there for config.
Yeah, I think depending on what you're doing, you might find that there's just repeatable patterns.
And so rather than having to build 10 different little applications, you may just be able to, again, extract the relevant things out into config and have a whole suite of applications which are pretty much the same architecture, do very, very similar things, and you're just tweaking the config.
you know, a lot of these big internal companies, they're like, you have to talk to this single
sign-on thing that we have, and you have to log to this thing that every app logs, you know,
there's just like this repetitive stuff, and it seems like it's pretty valuable to document that.
Yeah, and again, depends on your industry, depends on internal policies and stuff like that,
and those policies can be very well-founded, right? But if you're not doing that,
why would you invest the money?
Because it all comes down to money, right?
There's real costs to all this stuff.
So if you don't need the bulletproof solution,
then go with the one that gives you 99% uptime, as it were.
Yeah, absolutely.
And that someone who is not an expert can continue to manage.
So let's talk about upside, risk, and unicorns.
So what's the upside here, you think?
We talked about some already, but give it a rundown.
Yeah, like I think you can just move faster.
Everything's an experiment.
You learn quickly, you fail quickly, you refine,
and you decide, yeah, do we move forward
or is this just an experiment which taught us
that this is not something that we want to do
or as we did it, we discovered that the team down the road
has actually solved this problem and we'll just borrow what they've done so but I think sometimes
getting away from that piece of paper we drew a diagram which nobody can quite decipher to well
here's what we're thinking about and that people can react to it and go yep we've already done
that or no that's a great idea and you guys should pursue that the autonomy thing I think matters I
think autonomy isn't a bad word um i think it can be viewed that way at times but i think yeah
taking taking charge of your own team's productivity is not a bad thing
yeah a lot of times uh it would be well we're not really the developers that mess with the api
or the database we just consume that stuff so if we want any of these features we've got to get
them on board whereas here it's like actually we can just build enough of our own stuff or maybe
it's yeah but that part of the application is written in swift no one here knows how to write
swift well you know what you could bring cloud in a cloud could help you work through that portion
right get that that integrated or whatever so i think there's a lot of power to the autonomy
yeah and some things aren't that critical within an app right so if the if the UI is sort of good
enough then maybe it doesn't matter about having that skill but if you have the skill for the sort
of internal engine bit maybe you can you can work well enough I think another one to throw in here
on the upside is the getting over the fear of you, you touch it, you break it, you bought it
kind of thing. Because if you're not the one who wrote it and the person who wrote it left,
there's a lot of unknown. But one thing that Claude and those other agetic tools are good at is
just study this application, tell me what it does and what parts are involved in trying to add
feature x it's really good at that and then you could scope the problem much smaller like no one
understands it too well no one's worked on it but this looks pretty straightforward and here's all
we got to do you know uh yeah no the explain uh functionality is quite amazing isn't it but um
equally if you're going to explain it why not document it um and yeah and keep keep your document
in sync with your code right um and uh again the excuse that oh we don't have time to document it's
like well really um if the machine can sort of get you uh 95 of the way there and you actually
review it and just tweak it uh then it feels like a win-win to me 100 it's like if i can just kick
off clodder codex and say spend all the time you need to document it and here's the format where it
goes and i switch another tab and just go do something else like yeah you should have documentation
But the thing that if I can butt in for just a sec,
because I feel quite passionate about this one.
I always, as part of the readme or whatever, do the, well, what are we doing?
Why are we doing it?
And how are we doing it?
Because I think that framing is quite often missing from technical descriptions of things.
So the why is pretty important, I would say.
Yeah, it absolutely is.
All right.
Not all perfect though. Hidden risk. What are we talking about here?
Yeah, like I think any sort of software developed by end users within organizations is,
if not done appropriately well, can just introduce a bunch of risks. So
unknown dependencies, I guess, is just the idea that, yeah, you don't necessarily,
I'm not talking about Python dependencies here.
I'm talking about you just don't understand how things interact.
So I think if your tool is,
there's dependencies there between tools and stuff,
you just want to make sure that they're well understood
and that may not be immediately obvious.
Ownership sort of matters, right,
in terms of you do want somebody to own a tool.
Can you have a team owning a tool?
well maybe you can but I think you still want that sort of clear ownership so typically teams don't
own things like they might in principle but you still need a real a real person and again depending
on what the solution is and depending on your organizational requirements and if you've got
regulatory obligations yeah do you have appropriate controls in place and it may be that you just
really understand that at all right if um uh if you're an end user you may not appreciate
what data controls you have to place have have to have in place or security controls and things like
that although to your point uh maybe just get the machine to help some of that stuff yeah for sure
but it's not easy like for example like oh it's so great we can just use sqlite now and that's
our database yeah and then somebody's well the way we back that up is we just copy the dot sqlite
file and it has all this PII and HIPAA violations by copying that file the wrong place and like
it could be bad no absolutely and data really matters right so and depending again on industry
there are some very very strict requirements on that stuff as they should be but as an end user
you may not have appropriate understanding or visibility of those things so there are certainly
applications where you need to have sufficient knowledge right i would add another hidden risk
is supply chain badness yep that's actually been in the news so much lately right like with
npm and pi pi to a lesser degree but not to a zero degree but i mean there's light uh i think it was
light llm was pretty bad i was only out for a couple hours but and what these agents love to do
is they love to grab a package off of npm and install it and then you know get it then either
maybe they there's no checks to make sure that they get installed okay right that they don't
they're not they don't have a cve in them or if they do later yeah who knows to patch it because
who knows even where it was used right there's no yeah that stuff yeah so typically enterprises will
have solutions in place to sort of have internal mirrors of those sort of things but um again
You've got to make sure that you're governing those well.
Otherwise, you can easily miss stuff.
Right.
But does your AI know to use them?
Because if you're in the far, the more you go toward the vibe side, you just say, just make it.
I want it to look like Instagram or whatever.
It's like, well, Instagram uses this.
So we're going to grab it.
Yes.
You need some discipline around this stuff.
Yeah.
100%.
And then the unicorns.
I like this idea.
I'm on board with you.
What is this?
Well, again, sorry about the name.
It can be a bit pretentious, right?
A unicorn's just somebody with a pole in their head, right?
So I think the idea is, though, if you've, as I sort of flagged before,
if you've got somebody who has capability around software engineering
but also who has deep domain expertise, they bring a lot to the table, right?
So every person in team brings something to the table.
And I'm a great believer that you try and create environments
where people can do their best work.
But you do have people who quite often have done different things
in their careers and therefore bring a unique set of skills
in terms of just that depth in both software engineering and domain.
And those people can really, I think, bring a lot to the table in a team.
which you don't necessarily see a lot of a lot of people like to stick to a particular
single domain so that's not a critique it's just my observation
yeah i think having either somebody who has a lot of domain knowledge and programming skills
or data science skills depending on what you're trying to do that's really that would be ideal
but those people are hard to come by.
So maybe you create a pair of like this person really understands the problem
and has a little bit of skill in programming
and this person is really good at programming
and they know a little bit of what's going on.
You know what I mean?
Like that would be a really powerful combination, I think.
Yeah, and I think those sort of buddy pair type relationships, yeah,
can certainly be another model there.
And having people talk to each other in teams in general is quite powerful, right?
And you can get some really good results.
So, yeah, I don't think you necessarily need maybe the unicorn person, but the unicorn team.
I imagine this will be, for companies and teams who adopt this, it will probably feel a little bit like if you've never used a linter on your program,
rough black, something like that, that says you're doing all these things wrong.
And you run it the first time, you're like, there's a thousand and seven problems.
You're like, oh, my.
Well, we can't hire somebody for each one of those problems.
You know what I mean?
Yeah.
Like if those represent sort of these apps that could really be improved.
But I think with the velocity you can get with a couple of people and Claude or Codex on them,
You know, you could do this week we're going to modernize these two apps.
The next week we're going to modernize those.
And after a couple months, six months, depending on how big your company is,
like you'll have a lot of apps that are in good shape and don't need much attention.
They've been running without being touched forever.
Now they just run better.
Yeah, yeah.
And you would like to think that as you do each of these experiments, right,
you learn stuff, right?
So I'm probably going to use rough, for example.
But, yeah, you build up best practices, right?
So there's no way I let a coding assistant run
without locking it down severely, right?
And I think using your roughs and your TYs and mypyes
and all that sort of stuff allows you to constrain the machine
so that you're building a much better product each time.
And I think as you take those learnings out of the process,
I think you can uplift the quality of the software that you're building,
having really good tests there.
So just all those, what I would consider,
very basic software disciplines enables you to move both faster and better.
Yeah, that's really cool.
I totally agree.
I think you should tell your agent it can't move on until rough passes.
It can't move on until ty or Pyrefly or whatever you chose to pick.
And you set up the config files to like, this is how we work in our organization.
We format it like this.
We do this and so on.
And then it has to write code that conforms to what you're supposed to be doing, right?
Because the tool will tell that, no, you're not done.
Like rough return code one instead of zero.
Try again.
Yeah.
And I think that with those disciplines, which move you away from maybe your vibe coding to the view of the world,
it really does allow for some pretty good software to be built.
But like most things, if you're not scrutinizing it appropriately,
you're not applying your critical thinking skills,
then you sort of are asking for a few problems, I would say.
Yeah, indeed.
All right, you put a little decision tree down here.
Yep.
Talk us through where you think this is a good idea
and where people should maybe not do it or so on.
Like, walk us through this.
Yep.
So big mermaid fan.
So the diagram's down below.
But, yeah, like, if you're not solving...
I used to have a boss who said,
if you're going to solve a problem more than twice,
then you should automate it.
We can argue the merits of that,
but there's something to it in terms of just thinking about a problem.
So in this case, yeah,
are you solving something that's causing some friction, right?
So why would you solve a problem that is frictionless?
And sort of as I flagged before, yeah, do you have an owner?
Like, does somebody, is somebody going to care about this problem
to the degree that they will actually take ownership of it?
Because if you can't find an owner, then maybe nobody cares about it.
AKA, if it stops working, will they make it work again?
Yeah, yeah.
Can we explain what it does in two sentences?
Well, again, the machine can help you with that,
but if you can't articulate things to your stakeholders,
then why should they care?
And if you're...
I think it's in the Unix world,
you sort of have the philosophy of a tool,
a command line tool sort of does one thing well.
I think, again, similarly here,
you're trying to make sure that whatever tool you're building
is very, very explainable.
um do we know how to disable it quickly um yeah can we turn it off um so i guess most of the tools
that i'm thinking about here are deterministic uh so i'm not talking about tools that are necessary
uh generative ai powered or something like that uh because you definitely want to kill switch for
those uh but yeah just if you turn it off uh is anybody going to notice and and or if people do
notice um uh can you yeah can you turn it off and quarantine it uh appropriately
um i think i i'm sort of along the same lines here as a parallel would be could you get it back to
the way it was before yes yeah absolutely um and again i think documentation can be a good control
around some of those things um you're just not writing the documentation for quote unquote the
tool but maybe making sure the process and the problem that you're solving is well articulated
and the other one there maybe the other ones in the article i can't remember exactly where but just
yeah does it require that database thing and yeah and also do you need to do some sort of
authentication because by the time you're doing authentication it feels to me like within the
enterprise that somebody probably should be taking a look at things more closely it's not it's not
impossible that you may not want an authenticated tool within your team but you sort of got to talk
to people in other teams typically if you're doing authentication anyway so that may be a sign that
you're getting outside of not that the tool necessarily is a bad tool but it's time to
talk to others it might be a software project not yes just a afternoon project yeah absolutely
very cool well michael we're pretty short on time at this point i mean there's a lot more we could
talk about you have many tabs there are many times again now yes the internet's stable good yeah it
it seems like it's been better.
So this has been really interesting.
And I think it's going to give a lot of people a lot to think about.
I guess give us your thoughts about if there's a company or a decision maker at the company,
really is probably the right way to like this will envision, will like manifest.
If there's somebody who's like no AI at our company.
Yeah.
I feel like they're missing a big opportunity and it's not a huge risk.
But what would you tell that person?
Yes, it'd be interesting to look at the statistics on how many companies have not embraced AI to some degree.
So maybe it's a little bit of a straw person hypothetical now.
But, yeah, I don't have great enough visibility to know the numbers.
But you've heard me say the experiment word a lot, right?
So I guess it's experimenting within your risk tolerances.
So in other words, just try some things within the boundaries
that you're comfortable with, right?
Do some experiments.
I think for a lot of people, if you haven't used an LLM firsthand,
you tend not to believe it's true.
When I first use one, I'm like, oh, wow,
I can write a menu plan for a week with the help of a machine.
or I can plan a holiday.
And I think I was talking to a mate actually during the week about this
because he literally has not played with them.
And I'm like, just do an experiment.
Go and say, what should I do for my kid's school holiday plan, right?
Because I think, yeah, until you've done it, you don't sort of believe it.
So I sort of started with the autocomplete and I'd do pd.readcsv
and amazingly it would autocomplete and it's like wow this is crazy and then i started to
use perplexity for the first time a couple of years ago i'm like you've got to you've got to
be kidding me this can't be real um and i think as you start to work with the machine and
get that comfort you start to go i think there's a whole bunch of problems that we could solve so
I would say, yeah, experiment and then maybe partner with someone that is looking to help
you solve your business problems and be a trusted partner, not somebody who's just trying to extract
some money out of your company. So yeah, there's so much of that right now. It's such a
the whole industry is full of grifters like selling you like the next best thing. Like I
get probably 10 emails a day like, have you considered using AI to accelerate your company?
like yeah i've considered it go away i don't want to talk i mean yeah i apologize for those emails
um i won't send anymore no i i would i'll add a couple of things here to these little internal
apps and this is why i was so excited about your article is they offer an opportunity to experiment
in the smallest lowest risk rung of working with the stuff in your company it's it's you might have
a thousand people and a million customers, but here's the app that only three people in your
company use. And it's, it could make their life better. Like try it there. Right. That would be
amazing. And the other one is, I would say this is an engineering skill like writing code, like
object-oriented programming, like memory management and so on. And if you treat it like a casual
conversation with a buddy or whatever, it's, you're not going to get the right results. So
around here it's very weird and it's very different but you if you apply it you get good outcomes
uh yeah like um i have a close friend uh who's a lawyer for example and i i say to a yeah just
experiment right um because uh like if you run the same problem through the same machine multiple
times you do get different answers right so you've got to understand what llms are good at and things
like that. But as you develop confidence in what's actually being produced and that trust builds,
I think you'll actually start to solve some interesting problems. But if you don't experiment,
you won't know. There are many levels. There are many levels of which this can be employed and are
awesome. And you can just start easy, start low. And then, like I said, experiment, try it out,
be careful, and it'll be fun. All right. So here's the final word. I'll give you the
I've heard just people getting started.
What advice do you have for them?
Yeah, so there's lots of hype out there.
Ignore the hype and just try something.
In enterprises, most people have access to like a Microsoft Copilot or maybe if you're on the more tech side,
GitHub Copilot or Claude Code.
I don't think it matters what the tool is.
Give it a go.
I use a thing called warp.dev at home,
and I tend to use Claude quite often as well.
Again, you learn stuff by using different tools, right?
And no tool is perfect.
No human is either, so it's good to try different things.
Yeah, it absolutely is.
I'm a fan of Warp. Good recommendation. And yeah, Michael, thanks for being on the show.
It's been great to chat with you.
Thanks for having me. I really enjoyed it.
Yeah, you bet. Bye.
Bye-bye.